Update Open Source section of B Corp report (#8)
posit-dev/bcorp-report: sections/04-open-source.qmd

{{< colbreak >}}

> Since the 2023 PBC report, Posit has released several new packages in

Reviewer: Our last report was titled "2024 Annual Report". Do you really mean 2023 here?

> Since the 2023 PBC report, Posit has released several new packages in

Reviewer: Out last report was titled "2024 Annual Report". Do you really mean 2023 here?

providing a web application framework that makes it easy to tell data
stories in interactive point-and-click web applications. In April 2023,
Posit released the Python version of Shiny, bringing the same great
reactive programming model and modular design to the PyData ecosystem.  
More recently, the [Shiny Express](https://shiny.posit.co/py/docs/express-in-depth.html) 
syntax was introduced. It offers a steamlined syntax that makes it easier 
for Python developers to get started with Shiny.

{{< colbreak >}}

> New packages (listed in a later section) also highlight Shiny as a strong 

Reviewer: I don't love "listed in a later section".  Perhaps link directly?
```suggestion
New packages (see [AI and LLM Enablement](#ai-and-llm-enablement)) also highlight Shiny as a strong 
```

{{< pagebreak >}}

::: {.page-banner image_paths='("assets/images/hexes/ellmer.svg", "assets/images/hexes/chatlas.png", "assets/images/hexes/ragnar.png", "assets/images/hexes/gander-lores.png", "assets/images/hexes/mall.png")'}

## AI and LLM Enablement

::: {.cols-2}

> LLMs (large language models) are changing how data scientists work. 

Reviewer: Should we reverse the acronym/full here?

```suggestion
Large language models (LLMs) are changing how data scientists work. 
```

> Posit's Open Source teams are building tools to help data scientists responsibly
> use LLMs in their analysis, leveraging them to help during development, 
> and incorporating LLM capabilities in the solutions they provide others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Posit's Open Source teams are building tools to help data scientists responsibly
use LLMs in their analysis, leverage them during development, 
and incorporate LLM capabilities in the solutions they provide others.
```

> ### Selection of packages for enabling LLMs in data science applications {.unlisted}

Reviewer: This seems like a really long title...maybe:
```suggestion
### Packages to enable LLMs in data science {.unlisted}
```

- [Ellmer](https://ellmer.tidyverse.org/) makes it easy to use large language models (LLM) from R. It supports a  variety of LLM providers and implements a rich set of features including streaming outputs, tool/function calling and structured data extraction.

> - [Chatlas](https://posit.co/blog/announcing-chatlas/) is a flexible Python interface to many LLM providers (playing a similar role to ellmer). It supports tool use, function calling, and streaming responses.

Reviewer: Seems like we are using capital E for Ellmer elsewhere:
```suggestion
- [Chatlas](https://posit.co/blog/announcing-chatlas/) is a flexible Python interface to many LLM providers (playing a similar role to Ellmer). It supports tool use, function calling, and streaming responses.
```

> - [Ragnar](https://ragnar.tidyverse.org) brings Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to R. Helps users index their own data and get LLM responses with grounded answers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Ragnar](https://ragnar.tidyverse.org) brings Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to R. It helps users index their own data and get LLM responses with grounded answers.
```

> - [Querychat](https://github.com/posit-dev/querychat) adds an SQL-powered LLM to Shiny apps. It lets users explore data with natural language. Querychat works in both R and Python.

Reviewer: Having got to here and heard "R and Python" a number of times, it makes me wonder if we should call out earlier (maybe in the introduction to the Open Source section), our focus on bringing out both R and Python versions of new packages.

Author: I would like to bring up something to that effect.  Where appropriate, we bring both.

{{< colbreak >}}

> ### Selection of packages that assist during development {.unlisted}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Packages that assist development {.unlisted}
```

- [ShinyAssistant](https://shiny.posit.co/blog/posts/shiny-assistant/) helps prototype Shiny apps using a simple chat interface leveraging LLMs to generate entire applications.
- [Gander](https://posit.co/blog/introducing-gander/) is a coding assistant that understands R environments and shares context like column names and types to improve help quality.
- [Chores](https://posit.co/blog/introducing-chores/) connects Ellmer to your source editor in RStudio and Positron. I automates repetitive programming tasks.
- [Mall](https://posit.co/blog/mall-ai-powered-text-analysis/) enables LLM powered sentiment analysis, text summarization, text classification, information extraction and text translation.   Mall is available for both R and Python.

LLMs are also integrated as coding assistants into RStudio and Positron.

> Positron is Posit's new IDE described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Positron is Posit's new IDE described in the [Positron](#positron) section below.
```

  ggtitle("R Libs")
```

::: 

::: {.page-banner image_paths='("assets/images/hexes/RStudio.svg",)'}

## RStudio Integrated Development Environment

::: {.cols-2}

[RStudio](https://posit.co/products/open-source/rstudio/)
is a multi-language IDE designed for Data Science with R and Python. It
augments the standard code console with an editor that can display
Notebooks, launch apps, highlight code syntax, spot code errors, and
directly execute code. Built into the IDE are tools for debugging,
plotting, browsing files, and managing project histories and workspaces.
Together these tools make data scientists and developers much more
efficient.

{{< colbreak >}} 

There are 5 FTE Posit employees developing the RStudio IDE open-source
desktop and server products as of May 2024.

:::

```{r}
#| label: rstudio
rstudio |> growth_plot() + ggtitle("RStudio")
```

:::

> # Additional Posit Free-to-Use Solutions

Reviewer: This level 1 heading generates a new blank page in the PDF version of the report:
<img width="679" alt="Screenshot 2025-05-09 at 10 25 23 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1c46fa17-28ff-4914-b995-f82ff8a03d1c" />
Some options:
* Add an introduction to this section to make the page less blank.
* Move the heading to the Positron page, although that may make it less clear that "Posit Package Manager" is also part of this section.
* Put the  "free-to-use" items in the "Open source" section, but explain the distinction in the introduction, then add either "Open-source" or "Free-to-Use" on the left hand side of the page banners.

::: {.page-banner image_paths='("assets/images/hexes/positron.png",)' image_height="50%"}

## Positron

::: {.cols-2}

[Positron](https://positron.posit.co//)
is a new multi-language IDE designed for Data Science.  Positron has first-class, built-in 

> support for R and/or Python via an integrated console, with extensibility options for other 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
support for R and Python via an integrated console, with extensibility options for other 
```

to 1,000s of community extensions out of the box. 

{{< colbreak >}}

Additional languages typically used in package development are supported via existing third party 
extensions. These don’t make use of the full Positron data science experience including an interactive 
console, plots, and similar. Some examples include Rust, Javascript/Typescript, C/C++, or Lua.

Positron™ is licensed under the [Elastic License 2.0](https://github.com/posit-dev/positron?tab=License-1-ov-file#readme), 
a source-available license. [Read more](https://positron.posit.co/licensing.html) about what 
this license means and our decision to use it.

Positron is deeply focused on native data science workflows; it provides a batteries-included 
and cohesive experience beyond that of a general-purpose IDE or text editor such as VS Code.

A beta version is currently available for Windows and macOS, with a full release planned for August 2025.

There are 14 FTE Posit employees developing Positron as of May 2025.

:::

:::

::: {.page-banner image_paths='("assets/images/hexes/package-manager.svg",)'}

## Posit Public Package Manager

::: {.cols-2}

> WIth the ubiquity of open source software in our daily lives, one area

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the ubiquity of open source software in our daily lives, one area
```
